THE LAW
...
II.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 11 OF THE CONVENTION
41. The applicant union alleged that the obligation to amend its constitution in order to prevent its dissolution constituted an interference with its right to freedom of association as provided for by Article 11 of the Convention.
This provision reads as follows:
“ 1.
Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
2. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
This Article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed forces, of the police or of the administration of the State.”
42. The Government did not comment on this complaint.
A.
Whether there was an interference
43. In the applicant union’s submission – not disputed by the Government – the proceedings brought against it constituted an interference by the national authorities in the exercise of its right to freedom of association, and that interference deprived it of the possibility of pursuing collectively or individually the aims that it had laid down in its constitution.
This is also the view of the Court.
B.
Whether the interference was justified
44. The Court reiterates that such interference breaches Article 11 of the Convention unless it is “prescribed by law”, pursues one or more of the legitimate aims under PARAGRAPH_REF of that provision, and is “necessary in a democratic society” in order to fulfil those aims.
1. “Prescribed by law”
45. In the present case, the Court notes that it has not been disputed by the parties that the interference in question was “prescribed by law” and that it was based, in particular, on Articles 3 and 42 of the Constitution (see PARAGRAPH_REF above).
2. Legitimate aim
46. In the Court’s opinion, the impugned interference pursued a number of legitimate aims, namely the prevention of disorder or the protection of national security, which includes the protection of the State’s territorial integrity.
This has not been disputed by the parties.
3. “Necessary in a democratic society”
(a) Relevant general principles
47. Whilst referring to the general principles that are enshrined in its relevant case-law in matters of freedom of association (see Gorzelik and Others v. Poland [ GC ], no. 44158/98, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2004‑I, and the references cited therein, and Association Rhino and Others v. Switzerland, no. 48848/07, SECTION_REF, 11 October 2011), the Court reiterates that the right enshrined in Article 11 includes the right to form an association.
That citizens should be able to form a legal entity in order to act collectively in a field of mutual interest is one of the most important aspects of the right to freedom of association, without which that right would be deprived of any meaning (see Sidiropoulos and Others v. Greece, 10 July 1998, SECTION_REF, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998‑IV).
48. The Court further reiterates that the way in which national legislation enshrines this freedom and its practical application by the authorities reveal the state of democracy in the country concerned.
It can be seen from the Court’s case-law that it has repeatedly referred to the direct relationship that exists between democracy, pluralism and freedom of association, and it has established the principle that only convincing and compelling reasons can justify restrictions on freedom of association.
All such restrictions are subject to rigorous supervision (see, among many other authorities, United Communist Party of Turkey and Others v. Turkey, 30 January 1998, SECTION_REF‑45, Reports 1998‑I; Socialist Party and Others v. Turkey, 25 May 1998, SECTION_REF, Reports 1998‑III; and Refah Partisi (the Welfare Party) and Others v. Turkey [ GC ], nos. 41340/98, 41342/98, 41343/98 and 41344/98, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2003‑II).
49. Consequently, in determining whether a necessity within the meaning of Article 11 SECTION_REF exists, the States have only a limited margin of appreciation, which goes hand in hand with rigorous European supervision embracing both the law and the decisions applying it, including those given by independent courts.
50. Moreover, the Court reiterates that when it carries out its scrutiny, its task is not to substitute its own view for that of the relevant national authorities but rather to review under Article 11 the decisions they delivered in the exercise of their discretion.
This does not mean that it has to confine itself to ascertaining whether the respondent State exercised its discretion reasonably, carefully and in good faith; it must look at the interference complained of in the light of the case as a whole and determine whether it was “proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued” and whether the reasons adduced by the national authorities to justify it are “relevant and sufficient”.
In so doing, the Court has to satisfy itself that the national authorities applied standards which were in conformity with the principles embodied in Article 11 and, moreover, that they based their decisions on an acceptable assessment of the relevant facts (see United Communist Party of Turkey and Others, cited above, SECTION_REF; Yazar and Others v. Turkey, nos. 22723/93, 22724/93 and 22725/93, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2002‑II; and Sidiropoulos and Others, cited above, SECTION_REF).
(b) Application of the above-mentioned principles to the present case
51. In the present case, the Court notes that two sets of dissolution proceedings were brought against Eğitim-Sen on the ground that, under Article 2 (b) of its constitution, the union was defending the idea of education in a person’s “mother tongue”.
As regards the first set of proceedings, the public prosecutor decided to discontinue them on the ground that the objectives mentioned in the impugned Article were not in breach of the law.
Subsequently, at the request of the Chief of Staff of the armed forces, a second set of dissolution proceedings was initiated on the same ground against Eğitim-Sen.
Following those proceedings and the judgment of the Court of Cassation, Eğitim-Sen amended Article 2 (b) of its constitution by removing the impugned wording in order to avoid its dissolution by the national courts.
52. It is now for the Court to assess whether that second set of proceedings for the dissolution of Eğitim-Sen met a “pressing social need” and was “necessary in a democratic society” to fulfil the “legitimate aims pursued”.
53. The Court notes that the Employment Tribunal and the combined divisions of the Court of Cassation did not approach and interpret Articles 10 and 11 of the Convention in the same manner.
For the Employment Tribunal, the rights and freedoms enshrined in those Articles were fundamental in a democratic society, with the particular exception of incitement to violence, which was not constituted, in the tribunal’s view, by Article 2 (b) of Eğitim-Sen’s constitution.
By contrast, the combined divisions of the Court of Cassation emphasised the exceptions provided for by PARAGRAPH_REF of Article 11 of the Convention.
They took the view that Eğitim-Sen’s wish to defend education in a mother tongue other than Turkish ran counter to Articles 3 and 42 of the Constitution and the principle of the unitary State.
54. The Court must therefore ascertain whether the findings of the combined divisions of the Court of Cassation can be founded on an acceptable assessment of the relevant facts.
It first notes that the wording of Article 2 (b) of Eğitim-Sen’s constitution did not contain any incitement to use violence in order to fulfil the aims pursued.
Moreover, the Court of Cassation found that Eğitim-Sen had not encouraged the use of unlawful means for the fulfilment of its objective of enabling Turkish citizens to receive education in a mother tongue other than Turkish.
55. In the Court’s view, the principle defended by Eğitim-Sen, according to which individuals making up Turkish society could receive education in a mother tongue other than Turkish, is not incompatible with the fundamental principles of democracy.
It notes that nothing in the impugned Article of Eğitim-Sen’s constitution can be regarded as a call to violence, uprising or any other form of rejection of democratic principles, this being an essential factor to be taken into consideration (see Freedom and Democracy Party (ÖZDEP) v. Turkey [ GC ], no. 23885/94, SECTION_REF, ECHR 1999‑VIII).
It is sufficient to read the content of Article 2 (b) of Eğitim-Sen’s constitution, seen in the context of the public debate at the material time.
In this connection, the Court agrees with the reasoning of the public prosecutor, who decided to discontinue the first dissolution proceedings against Eğitim-Sen. At that time, the question of receiving education in one’s mother tongue was being debated publicly and in political parties and was tabled for debate in Parliament (see PARAGRAPH_REF above).
56. The Court recognises that such a proposal may have run counter to majority beliefs in public opinion, certain institutions or certain State organisations, or even to government policy.
That being said, the Court reiterates that it is necessary for the proper functioning of democracy that the various associations or political groups are able to take part in public debates in order to help find solutions to general questions concerning political and public stakeholders of all persuasions (see Vogt v. Germany, 26 September 1995, SECTION_REF, Series A no. 323, and United Communist Party of Turkey and Others, cited above, SECTION_REF).
57. The Court further notes that it can be seen from the latest European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) report on Turkey (see PARAGRAPH_REF above) that, in addition to children belonging to the minorities covered by the Lausanne Treaty – that is to say, non-Muslim minorities – receiving education in Turkish, there were other children of Turkish nationality whose mother tongue was not Turkish but Adyghe, Abkhazian or Kurdish.
In this connection it should be pointed out that Law no. 4771, enacted on 3 August 2002 and amending Law no. 2923 on foreign-language education and the learning of various languages and dialects by Turkish citizens, paved the way for the opening of private schools to teach “languages and dialects [ other than Turkish ] traditionally used by Turkish citizens in their daily lives”.
The Court observes that this willingness on the part of the legislature to open private courses for the teaching of languages and dialects other than Turkish contrasts with the position of the national authorities in finding that Article 2 (b) of Eğitim-Sen’s constitution breached Articles 3 and 42 of the Constitution.
58. The Court is not convinced by the reasoning of the combined divisions of the Court of Cassation, because it was not indicated in the judgment that Eğitim-Sen had carried out illegal activities capable of undermining the unity of the Republic of Turkey.
Neither did they indicate that Eğitim-Sen pursued aims that were incompatible with democratic principles or engaged in activities that were in breach of those stipulated in its constitution.
The Court notes with interest that the Employment Tribunal, for its part, dismissed the second dissolution application on the ground that a decision not to dissolve the union would have the effect of calming the social tension, disorder and antagonism that were prevalent in society, and of restoring social peace (see PARAGRAPH_REF above).
59. For that reason the Court is of the opinion that the mere presence in the union’s constitution of the term “to receive education in their mother tongue”, without any other element that would indicate or prove that the real aim was different from that stated in the impugned Article of the constitution, can not be incompatible with the principles of democracy.
It notes that Eğitim-Sen’s constitution, in its earlier version, indicated that the union defended the right of all individuals of society “to receive, with equality and freedom, a democratic, secular, scientific and cost-free education in their mother tongue”.
In the Court’s view, such an objective, with the aim of developing the culture of nationals having a mother tongue other than Turkish by providing education in that mother tongue, is not in itself incompatible with national security and does not represent a threat to public order.
Even supposing that the competent national authorities could have taken the view that education in one’s own mother tongue favoured the culture of a minority, the Court observes that, as it has previously found, the existence of minorities and different cultures in a country is a historical fact that a democratic society must tolerate, or even protect and support, in accordance with the principles of international law (see Tourkiki Enosi Xanthis and Others v. Greece, no. 26698/05, SECTION_REF, 27 March 2008).
60. In the light of the foregoing, the Court takes the view that the reasons indicated by the combined divisions of the Court of Cassation were not relevant or sufficient, and that they were not proportionate to the legitimate aims pursued.
It follows that the dissolution proceedings brought against the applicant union, which had the result of obliging it to amend Article 2 (b) of its constitution by deleting the term “to receive education in their mother tongue”, can not reasonably be regarded as meeting a “pressing social need”.
61. Accordingly, there has been a violation of Article 11 of the Convention.
