FOURTH SECTION
CASE OF  BARCZA AND OTHERS v. HUNGARY
(Application no. 50811/10)
JUDGMENT
STRASBOURG
11 October 2016
This judgment will become final in the circumstances set out in Article 44 § 2 of the Convention. It may be subject to editorial revision.
In the case of Barcza and Others v. Hungary,
The European Court of Human Rights (Fourth Section), sitting as a Chamber composed of:
Vincent A. De Gaetano,  President, András Sajó, Nona Tsotsoria, Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, Krzysztof Wojtyczek, Egidijus Kūris, Gabriele Kucsko-Stadlmayer,  judges, and Andrea Tamietti,  Deputy Section Registrar
Having deliberated in private on 20 September 2016,
Delivers the following judgment, which was adopted on that date:
PROCEDURE
1.  The case originated in an application (no. 50811/10) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Hungarian nationals, Ms Jenőné Barcza, Ms Jánosné Básits, and Mr László Pávai (“the applicants”), on 26 August 2010. The third applicant died on 21 September 2014. On 24 February 2015 his sons, Mr László Pávai Jr. and Mr István Pávai, applied to pursue the application before the Court in his stead, and retained the same lawyer to represent them.
2.  The applicants were represented by Mr A. Cech, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
3.  The applicants alleged that the establishment of a water protection zone on their plot of land and the authorities’ failure to expropriate their property constituted an interference with the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions for which they had not received adequate compensation, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
4.  On 16 June 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
THE FACTS
...
THE LAW
I.  PRELIMINARY POINT
26.  The third applicant died on 21 September 2014 and his sons informed the Court that they wished to pursue the application introduced by him (see paragraph 1 above). In a number of cases in which an applicant died in the course of the proceedings the Court has taken into account the statements of the applicant’s heirs or of close family members expressing the wish to pursue the proceedings (see  Léger v. France  (striking out) [GC], no. 19324/02, § 43, 30 March 2009, with further references). It has not been disputed that he is entitled to do so in the present case, and the Court sees no reason to hold otherwise (see  Dimitar Krastev v. Bulgaria , no. 26524/04, § 42, 12 February 2013).
II.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 1 OF PROTOCOL No. 1 TO THE CONVENTION
27.  The applicants complained that their right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions had been violated because of the domestic authorities’ continuing failure to decide on the expropriation of their plot of land and their consequent inability to make use of their property during that period. They relied on Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, which read as follows:
Article 6
“In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ... everyone is entitled to a ... hearing within a reasonable time by [a] ... tribunal ...”
Article 1 of Protocol No. 1
“Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.
The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties.”
A.  Scope of the Court’s examination
28.  According to the Government, the length of the expropriation proceedings is not a matter for consideration under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, but under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. They maintained that the present case was to be distinguished from the cases of  Brumărescu v. Romania  ([GC], no. 28342/95, ECHR 1999‑VII) and  Jasiūnienė v. Lithuania  (no. 41510/98, 6 March 2003), where the Court upheld the applicants’ complaint both under Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. In their understanding this was only so because the applicants in those cases, in contrast with the applicants in the present one, had not received compensation for the interference with the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions which had taken place.
29.  The Court observes that the applicants’ complaint does not focus on the expropriation proceedings as such, but rather on the question whether the failure to initiate the said expropriation proceedings, together with the restrictions established on the use of their property, was compatible with the guarantee of the right of peaceful enjoyment of possessions.
30.  Thus, the Court considers that the applicants’ complaints fall to be examined solely under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
B.  Admissibility
1.  The parties’ submissions
31.  The Government argued that the applicants’ grievances consisted of the loss of their property through expropriation. They maintained that the measures leading to the expropriation should be regarded as a whole, in particular because following the establishment of a water protection zone in 2002 the applicants’ property had become unsellable, amounting to a  de facto  expropriation already at that point. They contended that any disputes arising from the expropriation had been settled by the Pest County Government Office, which had awarded the applicants adequate compensation, in the amount of HUF 39,170,000 (see paragraph 22 above). Moreover, the domestic authorities acknowledged the existence of an interference with the applicants’ right to property. In particular, on 22 October 2009 the Pest County Regional Court ordered the administrative authorities to proceed with the expropriation (see paragraphs 17 above).
32.  The applicants argued that the act of expropriation of their plot of land should be distinguished from the period when they could not make use of their property, owing to the establishment of a water protection zone. While they had been adequately compensated for the loss of their property, no domestic court judgment or administrative decision had provided any redress for the latter. They further submitted that the decision of the Government Office made no mention of the lengthy restriction on the use of their property and therefore could not be interpreted as acknowledging a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
2.  The Court’s assessment
33.  The Court reiterates that a decision or measure favourable to the applicant is not in principle sufficient to deprive him or her of “victim” status unless the national authorities have acknowledged, either expressly or in substance, and then afforded redress for, the breach of the Convention (see  Dalban v. Romania  [GC], no. 28114/95, § 44, ECHR 1999-VI, and  Konstantin Markin v. Russia  [GC], no. 30078/06, § 82, ECHR 2012 (extracts)).
34.  The issue as to whether a person may still claim to be the victim of an alleged violation of the Convention essentially entails on the part of the Court an  ex post facto  examination of his or her situation (see  Scordino v. Italy (no. 1)  [GC], no. 36813/97, § 181, ECHR 2006‑V, and  Centro Europa 7 S.r.l. and Di Stefano v. Italy  [GC], no. 38433/09, § 82, ECHR 2012).
35.  In the instant case the applicants’ plot of land was finally expropriated by a decision of the Government Office on 16 December 2011 for which they received compensation on 27 January 2012. The expropriation put an end to the situation complained of by the applicants. However, in the Court’s view this did not constitute either an implicit acknowledgment of a breach of the Convention or redress for the period during which the applicants were unable to use their plot of land and the domestic authorities were not proceeding with the expropriation. The Court further considers that there was no acknowledgment, either explicitly or in substance, of a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in the context of the preceding domestic proceedings. In its decision of 22 October 2009 the Pest County Regional Court held that the dismissal of the applicants’ expropriation request by the Central Hungarian Regional Administration Office was based on an erroneous application of the law and a similarly erroneous assessment of the facts. Accordingly, it ordered the administrative authority to proceed with the expropriation. There is no indication in the decisions in question that, as well as being unlawful, the administrative authority’s conduct contravened the principles established by the Court in relation to the right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions.
36.  The Court therefore considers that the applicants’ inability to use their property for a period of nine years and the domestic authorities’ delay in the expropriation proceedings (see paragraphs 7 and 21 above) was neither acknowledged nor remedied by the domestic authorities.
37.  The Court therefore dismisses the Government’s objection.
38.  The Court notes that the application is not manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3(a) of the Convention. It further notes that it is not inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
C.  Merits
1.  The parties’ submissions
39.  The applicants’ submission stated that there had been an interference with their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions. From 2002 onwards the land in question was subject to a number of restrictions concerning industrial, transport and agricultural activities, and to a ban on construction. Apart from these constraints, the domestic authorities failed to proceed with the expropriation of the property for an excessive length of time, despite their legal obligation to do so. The applicants submitted that the combined effects of these measures had resulted in their property being subject to a measure of control from elsewhere. The applicants did not contest the legitimacy of the establishment of a water protection zone in 2002. Nonetheless, according to them, they had a legitimate reason to believe that their land, subject to a number of restrictions while the measure was in force, would be expropriated shortly afterwards; the authorities’ delay of nine years did not strike a fair balance between the individual and general interests involved. They also maintained that this situation did not give rise to any compensation.
40.  The Government argued that the primary aim of the impugned measure had to be taken into consideration when deciding on the nature of the interference. Since it had been clear from the relevant law that the properties affected by the establishment of a water protection zone could not remain in the ownership of the applicants, any measure interfering with the applicant’s rights aimed at and amounted to a deprivation of property. Furthermore, even in the absence of a formal expropriation, regard must be had to the realities of the situation, that is the  de facto  expropriation of the applicants’ property with effect from 2002 (see paragraph 31 above). Moreover, the case was to be distinguished from situations where expropriation of the applicants’ property had been engaged but not carried out (see  Sporrong and Lönnroth v. Sweden , 23 September 1982, Series A no. 52), and where the Court examined the case under the first rule in Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
2.  The Court’s assessment
41.  As the Court has stated on a number of occasions, Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 comprises three distinct rules: the first rule, set out in the first sentence of the first paragraph, is of a general nature and enunciates the principle of the peaceful enjoyment of property; the second rule, contained in the second sentence of the first paragraph, covers deprivation of possessions and subjects it to certain conditions; the third rule, stated in the second paragraph, recognises that the Contracting States are entitled,  inter alia,  to have a measure of control over the use of property in accordance with the general interest. The three rules are not, however, distinct in the sense of being unconnected. The second and third rules are concerned with particular instances of interference with the right to peaceful enjoyment of property, and should therefore be construed in the light of the general principle enunciated in the first rule (see, among many other authorities,  Beyeler v. Italy  [GC], no. 33202/96, § 98, ECHR 2000-I, and  Sargsyan v. Azerbaijan  [GC], no. 40167/06, § 217, ECHR 2015).
42.   In the present case, the   Court observes that the situation complained of by the applicants stemmed from the fact that their property was designated as an inner water protection zone and that the expropriation was envisaged by law but not carried out for a period of approximately nine years.
43.  In particular, the Court notes that following the adoption of a decision on the establishment of a water protection zone, the applicants’ plot of land was designated as an inner protection zone by an entry in the land registry. The decision of the General Directorate of Water Management of 16 December 2002 informed the applicants that pursuant to section 15 (1) of Government Decree no. 123/1997(VII.18.) their plot of land should be expropriated with a view to establishing the same ownership over the water reserve and over the land where it was located. The decision did not set a time-limit for the measure (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above). It also specified that the applicants could also initiate a transfer of ownership if the authorities failed to do so. Despite the eventual establishment of the water protection zone, the authorities did not expropriate the applicants’ plot of land until 2011, but used it for water management purposes.
44.  Therefore, the establishment of the protection zone significantly reduced the effective exercise of the applicants’ property right through restrictions on the use of property and through a ban on construction. These measures clearly amounted to a measure of control of the use of property, within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. However, the applicants’ complaint also relates to the authorities’ failure to expropriate their land, despite a legal obligation and their request to do so. As a result, the applicants were not able to get the pecuniary compensation which would have been due in case of expropriation. The Court acknowledges in this respect that, over a long period of time, pending the adoption of the decision on expropriation, the applicants’ right of property was precarious (see  Sporrong and Lönnroth,  cited above, § 60). However, until 16 December 2011, when the decision was taken, the applicants’ ownership right had not disappeared. Thus, contrary to the arguments of the Government, the effects of the measures involved were not such that they could be equivalent to a formal   or  de facto  deprivation of possessions. Although these measures did not all have the same legal effect and had different aims, the Court considers that they must be looked at together in the light of the first sentence of the first paragraph of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (see,  mutatis mutandis,   Matos e Silva, Lda., and Others v. Portugal , 16 September 1996, § 85,  Reports of Judgments and Decisions  1996‑IV).
45.  It now needs to be ascertained whether the interference in question struck a fair balance between the demands of the general interest of the community and the requirements of the protection of the individual’s fundamental rights (see, among many other authorities,  Jahn and Others v. Germany  [GC], nos. 46720/99, 72203/01 and 72552/01, § 93, ECHR 2005‑VI).
46.  In determining whether this requirement has been met, the Court recognises that regional planning and environmental conservation policies, where the community’s general interest is pre-eminent, confer on the State a margin of appreciation that is greater than when exclusively civil rights are at stake (see  Depalle v. France  [GC], no. 34044/02, § 84, ECHR 2010).
47.  In the present case, the Court notes that although the domestic authorities were obliged to initiate an expropriation procedure with a view to acquiring ownership of the plot of land for the water protection zone, they failed to do so. Even after the applicants had offered their plot for sale on 16 November 2005, no steps were taken to complete the expropriation procedure, since, apparently, the applicants’ attempt to have an authority designated to exercise jurisdiction over the matter did not yield any result (see paragraphs 11-12 above). In similar vein, the applicants’ further offer of 31 October 2007 to sell their property to the State was to no avail (see paragraph 14 above). Finally, even after the confirmation of the administrative authorities’ obligation to conclude the expropriation procedure by a court judgment on 22 October 2009 (see paragraph 17 above), National Asset Management Inc., the authority designated to conduct the expropriation, took no action for an additional period of two years, when the expropriation was finally enforced by the Pest County Government Office (see paragraph 21 above); the authorities thus took no action for an additional period of time, until 16 December 2011. Thus, in addition to the detrimental effects of the establishment of a water protection zone on the exercise of their right to property, the applicants were left in a state of uncertainty as to the fate of their plot of land over a long period of time (see,  mutatis mutandis ,  Frendo Randon and Others v. Malta,  no. 2226/10, § 55, 22 November 2011), during which they could neither realistically expect to sell their property at a fair price nor obtain expropriation against compensation.
48.  The foregoing considerations are sufficient to enable the Court to conclude that there has been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
II. APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
49.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
A.  Damage
50.  The applicants claimed, jointly, 77,250 euros (EUR) in respect of pecuniary damage. This amount corresponded to the loss of enjoyment they suffered as a result of the fact that they were unable to use their property, taking into account the value of compensation they had received for expropriation. The applicants also claimed compensation for non-pecuniary damage in the amount of EUR 30,000, jointly, for the stress and anxiety suffered by them over a long period of time.
51.  The Government contested these claims.
52.  Among the matters which the Court takes into account when assessing compensation are pecuniary damage, which is the loss actually suffered as a direct result of an alleged violation, and non-pecuniary damage, which is reparation for the anxiety, inconvenience, uncertainty and other non-pecuniary loss caused by such violation (see,  Žilinskienė v. Lithuania , no. 57675/09, § 60, 1 December 2015). In addition, if one or more heads of damage cannot be calculated precisely, or if the distinction between pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage proves difficult, the Court may decide to make an overall assessment (see  Comingersoll S.A. v. Portugal  [GC], no. 35382/97, § 29, ECHR 2000-IV).
53.  The Court considers that the applicants suffered a certain amount of pecuniary loss in connection with the failure of the State to proceed with the expropriation of their plot of land for an extended period of time and in connection with the restrictions on the use of their property. Moreover, the Court also finds that the applicants must have suffered uncertainty and frustration as a result of the violation found.
54.  Making its assessment on an equitable basis, as required by Article 41 of the Convention, the Court awards the applicants jointly a lump sum of EUR 39,000 in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage combined.
B.  Costs and expenses
55.  The applicants claimed EUR 5,937 plus 27% value-added tax (VAT) for the legal fees incurred before the Court. This amount corresponded to 48.2 hours of legal work charged at an hourly rate of EUR 118 plus VAT, and 6.2 hours of paralegal work charged at an hourly rate of EUR 40 plus VAT.
56.  The Government contested this claim.
57.  According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that these have been actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to quantum. In the present case, regard being had to the documents in its possession and the above criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award the sum of EUR 5,937 jointly for the proceedings before the Court.
C.  Default interest
58.  The Court considers it appropriate that the default interest rate should be based on the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank, to which should be added three percentage points.
FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT, UNANIMOUSLY,
1.   Declares  the application admissible;
2.   Holds  that there has been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention;
3.   Holds  unanimously,
(a)  that the respondent State is to pay the applicants, jointly, within three months from the date on which the judgment becomes final in accordance with Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts, to be converted into the currency of the respondent State at the rate applicable at the date of settlement:
(i)  EUR 39,000 (thirty-nine thousand euros), plus any tax that may be chargeable, in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage combined;
(ii)  EUR 5,937 (five thousand nine hundred and thirty-seven euros), plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applicants, in respect of costs and expenses;
(b)  that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank during the default period plus three percentage points;
4.   Dismisses  the remainder of the applicants’ claim for just satisfaction.
Done in English, and notified in writing on 11 October 2016, pursuant to Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
Andrea Tamietti Vincent A. De Gaetano Deputy Registrar President
