THE LAW
I. ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLES 3, 8 AND 13 OF THE
CONVENTION
53. The applicant complained that the investigation into her allegations of rape had not been thorough, effective and independent and that she had no effective remedy in that respect. She relied on Articles 3, 8 and 13 of the Convention, which read:
Article 3
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
Article 8
“1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”
Article 13
“Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in [the] Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.”
A. Admissibility
1. Compliance with the six-month rule
54. The Government argued that the part of the applicant’s complaints under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention concerning the conduct of the police and the gynaecologist who had examined her on 23 August 2007 fell outside the six-month time-limit since the alleged failures were to be regarded as instantaneous acts which had not produced any permanent consequences or a continuous situation.
55. The applicant disagreed with that viewpoint and argued that the conduct of the police and lack of compliance with the professional rules by the gynaecologist were integral parts of the investigation as a whole and could not be analysed separately from the other aspects of the case.
56. The Court observes that the applicant’s complaints under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention concerning failures and errors on the part of the national authorities concern the investigation as such and cannot be regarded as isolated events; they have to be seen as a whole.
57. The Court further observes that the Croatian legal system provides for a possibility for the injured party to act as a subsidiary prosecutor. In respect of criminal offences for which the prosecution is to be undertaken by the State Attorney’s Office, either of its own motion or upon a private application, where the Office declines to prosecute on whatever ground, the injured party may take over the prosecution as a subsidiary prosecutor.
58. The Court reserves its position on the question whether injured parties are required to pursue the prosecution on their own by lodging a bill of indictment in connection with allegations of such serious criminal offences as rape. However, it considers that where the national system allows for such a possibility and the injured party makes use of it these proceedings shall also be taken into account (see, mutatis mutandis, V.D. v. Croatia, no. 15526/10, § 53, 8 November 2011).
59. Since the applicant in the present case did pursue the prosecution of D.Š., the Court notes that those proceedings ended on 27 May 2011. The present application was lodged with the Court on 19 July 2010. It follows that the Government’s objection as to compliance with the six-month rule has to be dismissed.
2. Exhaustion of domestic remedies
60. The Government argued that the applicant had failed to exhaust all available domestic remedies. Although she had lodged a complaint about the conduct of the police officers with the Ministry of the Interior, she had not lodged a regular criminal complaint with the competent State Attorney’s Office.
61. As regards the conduct of the gynaecologist who had examined the applicant on 23 August 2007, the applicant failed to lodge a complaint with the inspection body of the Croatian Medical Association.
62. In reply to the Government’s observations, the applicant submitted that she had not had a duty to lodge a criminal complaint against the police officers because the State Attorney’s Office had been aware of all the facts and circumstances of the case, including the conduct of both the police officer and the gynaecologist.
63. The Court notes that the applicant’s complaints as to the conduct of the police and the gynaecologist are part of her overall complaints about a lack of thoroughness and efficiency in the investigation into her allegations of rape and should not be seen in isolation as separate factors. Furthermore, by lodging a complaint with the Ministry of the Interior the applicant made adequate use of the available remedies as regards the conduct of the police and there was no need for her to lodge a criminal complaint about it since she did not argue that the conduct of the police officers amounted to a criminal offence.
64. As regards the alleged failures of the gynaecologist, the Court notes that the obligation to conduct a thorough, effective and independent inquiry into allegations of rape is an obligation which concerns the State authorities responsible for conducting an investigation, and that a gynaecologist is not in such a position. Therefore, any possible failures on the part of the gynaecologist have to be seen in the context of the conduct of the State bodies conducting the investigation.
65. Against the above background, it follows that the Government’s objection must be dismissed.
3. The applicant’s victim status
66. The Government argued that the applicant had lost her victim status because the relevant bodies of the Ministry of the Interior had found that the police officers involved had not taken all the required steps during the initial police inquiry into the applicant’s allegations of rape, which had amounted to a grave breach of their official duty and for which they had been fined ten per cent of their monthly salary.
67. The applicant replied that she was still a victim of the violations claimed because it was the positive obligation of the State under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention in cases of allegations of rape to conduct an effective and through investigation and thus secure effective protection to victims of sexual violence. Internal proceedings within the Ministry of the Interior against the police officers and the symbolic fine applied could in no way excuse the State from that duty.
68. The Court considers that the question of whether the applicant may still be considered a victim of the violation claimed should be joined to the merits, since it is closely linked to the substance of the applicant’s complaint about the State’s alleged failure to conduct a thorough and effective investigation into her allegations of rape.
4. Conclusion
69. The Court further considers that this complaint is not manifestly illfounded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 of the Convention. Moreover, it is not inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
B. Merits
1. The parties’ arguments
(a) The applicant’s submissions
70. The applicant maintained that the case should be examined under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention. Relying on the Court’s judgment in the case of M.C. v. Bulgaria (no. 39272/98, ECHR 2003-XII), and Aydin v. Turkey (25 September 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997-VI,) she argued that the act of rape reached the level of cruelty necessary for the application of Article 3. She further argued that such an act violated the right to personal integrity protected under Article 8 of the Convention. In the applicant’s view, States were under an obligation to ensure effective protection against acts of rape, even in relations between private individuals, through the adoption of criminal-law provisions which would ensure adequate punishment for acts of rape and the obligation to conduct a thorough, independent and effective investigation and criminal prosecution.
71. The applicant argued that the legal framework as regards the criminal offence of rape in the Croatian legal system was insufficient because Article 188 of the Criminal Code required the use of force or threats by the perpetrator. Legal practice also required resistance from the victim. She maintained that such a definition of the criminal offence of rape was too narrow since it did not cover all unwilling sexual intercourse. As regards the rules of criminal procedure, those in force at the time of the event in issue, namely in 2007, did not ensure the right of the victim to legal aid.
72. In practice the victim was often victimised and traumatised in the proceedings, in particular through the theory of the so-called “victim’s contribution”. The judges often analysed aspects of the victim’s behaviour, such as wearing a short skirt, visiting disco clubs, hitchhiking and so on, and on the basis of such facts applied decreased sentences to the perpetrators
73. As regards her case, the applicant submitted that there had been certain failures during the police inquiry and investigation. The police had not carried out an in situ inspection; they had not secured all the evidence, such as biological and other traces at the scene of the crime, and had not taken her clothes for forensic analysis. The skirt she had been wearing on the critical occasion which she had given to the police on 30 August 2007 had never been given for forensic examination. The police officers had treated her with disrespect and asked the men present at the scene why they had not thrown her into the sea. An officer had also said that she had been drunk and not raped. She had not immediately been interviewed or instructed to seek psychological aid and had given her statement for the first time three weeks after the event at issue.
74. The gynaecologist who had examined her at the S. Hospital had made no comments about the lacerations on her body, considering that these were not in his domain. The medical report drawn up at the C. Medical centre two days after the event at issue had been in contradiction to the findings of the gynaecologist.
75. The psychiatric report concerning the applicant had been drawn up without her participation, on the basis of a telephone conversation. The report had relied on previous medical reports from 2001 which had been asked for by the investigating judge of his own motion, allegedly in order to establish whether the applicant used any medication, which had no relevance for the event at issue. The applicant argued that the medical record from 2001, when she had been treated by a psychiatrist, had been obtained and kept in the case file only so as to cover the failures in the investigation and to show her in a negative light and thus stress her own role and not that of the suspect.
76. The applicant had asked that Judge S.G. withdraw from the investigation of the case on account of his lack of impartiality, but she had not received any reply. She argued that he had acted with prejudice against her when he expressed his disagreement with the request for an investigation. In that decision he had “labelled” her by saying that she had disturbed public peace and order, caused disturbances, shouted, woken up the guests, and consumed large quantities of alcoholic beverages, whereas he had not commented at all on the behaviour of the suspect, who had also been under the influence of alcohol. The judge had also stated that he had consulted the entire case file and concluded that “the injured party and the suspect had not been alone at any time”, which was in contradiction to the statement of the suspect given in his first interview with the police. Even in the evidence he gave to the investigating judge the suspect had said that he and the applicant had gone to the ship and started kissing. The fact that the judge had not paid attention to these crucial circumstances, but instead concentrated exclusively on the behaviour of the applicant showed his lack of impartiality.
77. On 8 January 2008 the police officers had visited her parents in M.L. and interviewed her father about his relationship with the applicant, which was completely unnecessary for the purposes of the investigation. 78. After she had taken over the prosecution no steps had been taken between 28 April 2008 and 17 January 2011, for more than two years and eight months.
(b) The Government’s submissions
79. The Government argued that all the State bodies involved in the investigation of the applicant’s allegations of rape had taken all possible steps in order to establish the facts of the case and adopted correct, lawful and reasoned decisions. They analysed in detail the evidence collected during the investigation and asserted that the national authorities had correctly concluded that there had not been sufficient evidence for the further criminal prosecution of D.Š.
80. In their opinion the applicant had given several contradictory statements during the police enquiry and the investigation, which had warranted that a psychiatric report in respect of her be commissioned in order to establish her ability to correctly interpret and reconstruct the event at issue.
(c) The third-party intervention
81. Interights argued that because of the particular susceptibility of victims of rape to being re-traumatised through interaction with the criminal justice system, a distinct approach should be taken to the interpretation of the State’s positive obligations in the context of crimes of sexual violence. They defined secondary victimisation as victimisation that occurred not as a direct result of the criminal act but through the response of institutions and individuals to the victim. It might occur at any stage of a victim’s involvement with the criminal justice system.
82. They argued that States have a duty to prevent secondary victimisation by putting in place specific measures such as specialised training of law-enforcement personnel, adopting specialist techniques for protection against the traumatising effects of police and court questioning and examination, restrictions on the admissibility of certain evidence, and providing multidisciplinary professional assistance for victims, as well as establishing special victim support centres.

The Court’s assessment
(a) General Principles
83. The Court has already held that rape amounts to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention (see Aydın v. Turkey and M.C. v. Bulgaria, cited above).
84. The relevant principles as to the existence of a positive obligation to punish rape and to investigate rape cases have been enunciated in the case of M.C. v. Bulgaria as follows:
“149.
The Court reiterates that the obligation of the High Contracting Parties under Article 1 of the Convention to secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in the Convention, taken together with Article 3, requires States to take measures designed to ensure that individuals within their jurisdiction are not subjected to ill-treatment, including ill-treatment administered by private individuals (see A. v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 23 September 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-VI, p. 2699, SECTION_REF; Z and Others v. the United Kingdom [ GC ], no. 29392/95, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2001-V; and E. and Others v. the United Kingdom, no. 33218/96, 26 November 2002).
150. Positive obligations on the State are inherent in the right to effective respect for private life under Article 8; these obligations may involve the adoption of measures even in the sphere of the relations of individuals between themselves.
While the choice of the means to secure compliance with Article 8 in the sphere of protection against acts of individuals is in principle within the State’s margin of appreciation, effective deterrence against grave acts such as rape, where fundamental values and essential aspects of private life are at stake, requires efficient criminal-law provisions.
Children and other vulnerable individuals, in particular, are entitled to effective protection (see X and Y v. the Netherlands, judgment of 26 March 1985, Series A no. 91, pp. 11-13, SECTION_REF, and August v. the United Kingdom (dec.), no. 36505/02, 21 January 2003).
151. In a number of cases, Article 3 of the Convention gives rise to a positive obligation to conduct an official investigation (see Assenov and Others v. Bulgaria, judgment of 28 October 1998, Reports 1998-VIII, p. 3290, SECTION_REF).
Such a positive obligation can not be considered in principle to be limited solely to cases of ill-treatment by State agents (see, mutatis mutandis, Calvelli and Ciglio v. Italy [ GC ], no. 32967/96, ECHR 2002-I).
152. Further, the Court has not excluded the possibility that the State’s positive obligation under Article 8 to safeguard the individual’s physical integrity may extend to questions relating to the effectiveness of a criminal investigation (see Osman v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 28 October 1998, Reports 1998-VIII, p. 3164, SECTION_REF,).
153. On that basis, the Court considers that States have a positive obligation inherent in Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention to enact criminal-law provisions effectively punishing rape and to apply them in practice through effective investigation and prosecution.”
85. Even though the scope of the State’s positive obligations might differ between cases where treatment contrary to Article 3 has been inflicted through the involvement of State agents and cases where violence has been inflicted by private individuals, the requirements as to an official investigation are similar.
For the investigation to be regarded as “effective”, it should in principle be capable of leading to the establishment of the facts of the case and to the identification and punishment of those responsible.
This is not an obligation of result, but one of means.
The authorities must have taken the reasonable steps available to them to secure the evidence concerning the incident, including, inter alia, eyewitness testimony, forensic evidence, and so on.
Any deficiency in the investigation which undermines its ability to establish the cause of injuries or the identity of the persons responsible will risk falling foul of this standard, and a requirement of promptness and reasonable expedition is implicit in this context.
In cases under Article 3 of the Convention where the effectiveness of the official investigation has been at issue, the Court has often assessed whether the authorities reacted promptly to the complaints at the relevant time.
Consideration has been given to the opening of investigations, delays in taking statements, and to the length of time taken for the initial investigation (see Denis Vasilyev v. Russia, no. 32704/04, SECTION_REF, 17 December 2009 with further references, and Stoica v. Romania, no. 42722/02, SECTION_REF, 4 March 2008).
86. The Court further emphasises the primary duty of the State to secure the right not to be exposed to treatment contrary to Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention or, in the context of the present case, to attacks on one’s personal integrity, by putting in place an appropriate legal and administrative framework to deter the commission of offences against the person, backed up by law-enforcement machinery for the prevention, suppression and punishment of breaches of such provisions (see Sandra Janković v. Croatia, no. 38478/05, SECTION_REF, 5 March 2009; and Beganović v. Croatia, no. 46423/06, SECTION_REF, 25 June 2009).
(b) Application of these principles to the circumstances of the present case
87. As to the criminal-law mechanisms provided in the Croatian legal system, the Court notes that rape is a criminal offence under the Criminal Code and includes not only forced sexual intercourse but other sexual acts as well.
The Court observes further that the Croatian criminal law distinguishes between criminal offences to be prosecuted by the State Attorney’s Office, either of its own motion or upon a private application, and criminal offences to be prosecuted by means of a private prosecution.
The latter category concerns criminal offences of a lesser nature.
The Court also notes that the applicant alleged that she had been raped.
Prosecution in respect of that offence is to be undertaken by the State Attorney’s Office of its own motion.
88. The Court further observes that the Croatian legal system also provides for the injured party to act as a subsidiary prosecutor.
In respect of criminal offences for which the prosecution is to be undertaken by the State Attorney’s Office, either of its own motion or upon a private application, where that Office declines to prosecute, on whatever ground, the injured party may take over the prosecution as a subsidiary prosecutor.
89. The Court will next examine whether or not the impugned regulations and practices, and in particular the domestic authorities’ compliance with the relevant procedural rules, as well as the manner in which the criminal-law mechanisms were implemented in the instant case, were defective to the point of constituting a violation of the respondent State’s positive obligations under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention.
90. In this connection, the Court firstly observes that the national authorities established that I.Z., the police officer assigned to the case, had not undertaken all necessary steps in the initial phase of the police enquiry.
Thus, their findings were that he “did not order an in situ inspection; nor did he take a statement from the injured party or conduct a detailed informative interview with her... nor did he take the clothes that the injured party and the suspect were wearing in order to give them for forensic examination... ” (see PARAGRAPH_REF above).
91. At this juncture the Court considers it appropriate to reiterate the principles concerning the victim status of an applicant.
In this regard the Court observes that under Article 34 of the Convention it “may receive applications from any person... claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in the Convention or the Protocols thereto”.
It falls first to the national authorities to redress any alleged violation of the Convention.
In this connection, the question whether an applicant can claim to be a victim of the violation alleged is relevant at all stages of the proceedings under the Convention (see Burdov v. Russia, no. 59498/00, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2002-III, and Trepashkin v. Russia, no. 36898/03, SECTION_REF, 19 July 2007).
92. The Court also reiterates that a decision or measure favourable to an applicant is not in principle sufficient to deprive him or her of his or her status as a “victim” unless the national authorities have acknowledged, either expressly or in substance, and then afforded redress for, the breach of the Convention (see Amuur v. France, 25 June 1996, SECTION_REF, Reports 1996-III, and Dalban v. Romania [ GC ], no. 28114/95, SECTION_REF, ECHR 1999-VI).
Such acknowledgment and redress are usually the result of the process of exhaustion of domestic remedies (see Koç and Tambaş v. Turkey (dec.), no. 46947/99, 24 February 2005).
93. The Court further reiterates that the machinery for the protection of fundamental rights established by the Convention is subsidiary to the national systems safeguarding human rights.
The Convention does not lay down for the Contracting States any given manner for ensuring within their internal law the effective implementation of the Convention.
The choice as to the most appropriate means of achieving this is in principle a matter for the domestic authorities, who are in continuous contact with the vital forces of their countries and are better placed to assess the possibilities and resources afforded by their respective domestic legal systems (see Swedish Engine Drivers’ Union v. Sweden, 6 February 1976, SECTION_REF, Series A no. 20; Chapman v. the United Kingdom [ GC ], no. 27238/95, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2001-I; and Sisojeva and Others v. Latvia [ GC ], no. 60654/00, SECTION_REF, ECHR 2007-II).
94. In the Court’s view, the finding that police officers F.C. and I.Z. had failed to conduct the initial police enquiry into the applicant’s allegations of rape in a satisfactory manner, and that officer I.Z. did not collect all the relevant evidence amounts to an acknowledgment that at the initial stage the investigation into the applicant’s allegations of rape was flawed and lacked the required thoroughness.
95. The Court also notes that section 13 of the State Administration Act provides for the possibility of seeking compensation from the State in respect of omissions by State officials.
In the Court’s, view, the finding that officer I.Z. had committed a grave breach of his official duty, defined as a “failure to act or untimely or reckless conduct or conduct lacking diligence in the carrying out of his official duties” gave good grounds to the applicant for lodging a compensation claim against the State.
While the above-mentioned flaws at the initial stage of the police enquiry, when evidence had to be secured, certainly undermined the possibility of establishing the facts of the case with more certainty in any further investigation, the fact that they were acknowledged by the national authorities leads the Court to conclude that the issue of the conduct of the police during the initial stages of the enquiry into the applicant’s allegations of rape has been adequately addressed by the national bodies.
Such an assessment, coupled with the possibility for the applicant to seek compensation from the State in that regard, shows that there exists a system of redress in the national law for the breach of official duty.
96. However, this can not satisfy the requirement of an effective investigation.
These initial flaws necessarily had an impact on the effectiveness of the entire investigation.
The applicant made further complaints as regards the effectiveness of the investigation, such as the fact that the skirt she had been wearing on the occasion at issue had never been sent for forensic examination; that witness Ve.M., who allegedly had some knowledge about her underwear being found on the boat (see above, SECTION_REF), [ 9 ] had not been heard; and those concerning the position of Judge S.G., who acted as the investigating judge in the case at issue.
Thus, the applicant may still claim to be a victim of the violation claimed.
97. In this respect the role of Judge S.G. in the investigation of the applicant’s allegations of rape should be addressed.
In this regard, the Court notes that when an investigating judge receives a request for opening an investigation from the State Attorney’s Office, he or she has to hear the suspect and then decide, on the basis of the evidence contained in the request, whether he or she agrees with such a request.
In the case of his or her consent, the investigating judge issues a decision on the opening of the investigation.
In the case to the contrary the investigating judge issues a decision expressing his or her disagreement with the request for the opening of the investigation (Articles 189 and 190 of the Code on Criminal Procedure).
98. In the present case Judge S.G., acting as the investigating judge, disagreed with the request to open an investigation into the applicant’s allegations of rape in respect of D.Š.
He based his disagreement on the written police records of the interviews carried out with the persons present at the scene at the time when the police arrived, the medical report drawn up by the gynaecologist who examined the applicant on the same day, and the oral evidence given by D.Š.
to the investigating judge.
99. The Court does not consider that in every instance where an investigating judge who has initially expressed his or her disagreement with the request for an investigation later conducts the investigation in the same case lacks impartiality.
Each case warrants an assessment of the judge’s impartiality in view of all the circumstances.
100. In the present case the investigating judge disagreed with the request by the S. County State Attorney’s Office to open an investigation in respect of D.Š.
in connection with the applicant’s allegations of rape.
He voiced quite a strong opinion of the applicant and largely based his disagreement on the applicant’s conduct (see PARAGRAPH_REF above).
101. In this connection, it is to be reiterated that the Court attaches significant importance to appearances in matters of criminal justice, since justice must not just be done but must be seen to be done.
What is at stake is the confidence which the courts in a democratic society must inspire in the public (see, mutatis mutandis, Borgers v. Belgium, 30 October 1991, SECTION_REF, Series A no. 214‑B, and Mirilashvili v. Russia, no. 6293/04, SECTION_REF, 11 December 2008).
Such considerations equally concern the accused and the injured parties in criminal proceedings.
Thus, the Court stresses that the allegation that a rape victim was under the influence of alcohol or other circumstances concerning the victim’s behaviour or personality can not dispense the authorities from the obligation to effectively investigate.
102. The Court also notes that the investigating judge concluded as follows: “The criminal complaint and the enclosures in the case-file show with certainty that the injured party was not, at any moment, alone with the suspect... ”.
This choice of words leaves little doubt as to the judge’s view as regards one of the crucial aspects of the case, namely the question whether the applicant and D.Š.
were left alone at any time.
This strongly worded statement combined with the emphasis on the applicant’s own conduct could raise a question of appearances as to the judge’s objectivity and impartiality in respect of his continued conduct of the investigation.
103. In this context, the Court notes that the applicant made further complaints as to the effectiveness of the investigation, arguing that the authorities had not complied with their obligation to take all reasonable steps available to them to secure the evidence concerning the incident at issue.
The skirt the applicant was wearing on the critical occasion and which she gave to the police of her own accord was never sent for forensic examination.
It was also argued that insufficient efforts were made to ensure that witness Ve.M., [ 10 ] who appeared to have some relevant knowledge, was heard by the investigating judge.
No in situ inspection was carried out at the time when the police arrived at the scene.
Furthermore, the authorities never answered the applicant’s allegations of bias of the investigation judge.
These objective flaws in the investigation show a passive attitude as to the efforts made to properly probe applicant’s allegations of rape.
104. The Court thus finds that in the present case there has been a violation of the procedural aspect of both Article 3 and Article 8 of the Convention and dismisses the Government’s objections as to the applicant’s victim status.
It also holds that no separate issue arises under Article 13 of the Convention.
II.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 14 OF THE CONVENTION
105. The applicant complained that the national authorities involved in the investigation of her allegations of rape had discriminated against her on the basis of her gender.
She relied on Article 14 of the Convention, the relevant part of which reads:
“The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in [ the ] Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.”
106. The applicant argued that the victims of sexual violence were mostly women.
In Croatia the level of sensitivity and specific knowledge of law-enforcement personnel in this area was quite low and there was no protocol on the procedure to be followed in cases of sexual violence.
As regards the present case, the investigating judge had acted with prejudice against the applicant when he expressed his disagreement with the request for an investigation and labelled the applicant as merely a person having disturbed public peace and order and consumed a large quantity of alcohol, and ignored the crucial facts of the case.
107. The Court considers that this complaint is closely linked to the one concerning the procedural aspect of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention and must also therefore be declared admissible.
108. The Court finds, however, that this complaint essentially overlaps with the issues which have been examined under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention.
Having found a violation of those provisions, the Court holds that no separate issue arises under Article 14 of the Convention.
III.
APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
109. Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
