ECTION
CASE OF  TALMANE v. LATVIA
(Application no. 47938/07)
JUDGMENT
STRASBOURG
13 October 2016
This judgment will become final in the circumstances set out in Article 44 § 2 of the Convention. It may be subject to editorial revision.
In the case of Talmane v. Latvia,
The European Court of Human Rights (Fifth Section), sitting as a Chamber composed of:
Angelika Nußberger,  President, Khanlar Hajiyev, Erik Møse, Faris Vehabović, Yonko Grozev, Carlo Ranzoni, Mārtiņš Mits,  judges, and Milan Blaško,  Deputy Section Registrar,
Having deliberated in private on 20 September 2016,
Delivers the following judgment, which was adopted on that date:
PROCEDURE
1.  The case originated in an application (no. 47938/07) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Lilija Talmane (“the applicant”), on 10 October 2007.
2.  The applicant was represented by Ms E. Kalniņa, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs I. Reine, and subsequently Mrs K. Līce.
3.  The applicant alleged that the refusal of the Senate of the Supreme Court to examine her appeal on points of law without a reasoned decision infringed her right to a fair hearing.
4.  On 15 January 2009 the above complaint was communicated to the Government of the Republic of Latvia. The Government of the Russian Federation did not exercise their right to intervene in the above case as a third party.
THE FACTS
...
THE LAW
I.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 6 § 1 OF THE CONVENTION ON ACCOUNT OF THE LACK OF A REASONED DECISION
18.  The applicant complained that the refusal of the Senate of the Supreme Court to examine her appeal on points of law without a reasoned decision infringed her right to a fair hearing as provided in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, which in its relevant part reads as follows:
“In the determination of ... any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair ... hearing ... by [a] ... tribunal ...”
A.  Admissibility
1.  The parties’ submissions
19.  The Government argued that the applicant had failed to exhaust domestic remedies. Specifically, she had not asked the prosecutor to lodge an appeal ( protests ) against the judgment of 13 February 2007, as provided for under chapter 63 of the Criminal Procedure Law, which set out conditions for the review of judgments and decisions which have entered into force (see paragraph 13 above).
20.  The applicant did not comment on this matter.
2.  The Court’s assessment
21.  According to the Court’s case-law, the applicants are only obliged to use an effective remedy that is actually available in theory and in practice at the relevant time (see, among other authorities,  Sejdovic v. Italy  [GC], no. 56581/00, § 46, ECHR 2006‑II). It follows that Article 35 § 1 of the Convention does not require that discretionary or extraordinary remedies be exhausted (see, among other authorities,  Babayev v. Azerbaijan  (dec.), no. 36454/03, 27 May 2004).
22.  In the case of  Dāvidsons and Savins   v. Latvia , nos. 17574/07 and 25235/07, § 36, 7 January 2016, the Court already assessed an identical argument raised by the Government and found that the review procedure enshrined in chapter 63 of the Criminal Procedure Law constituted an extraordinary remedy.
23.  The aforementioned suffices to conclude that this procedure cannot be taken into account for the purposes of Article 35 § 1 of the Convention. The Government’s objection must therefore be rejected.
24.  The Court notes that this complaint is not manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention. It further notes that it is not inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
B.  Merits
1.  The parties’ submissions
25.  The applicant upheld her initial submissions set out in her application form in which she principally argued that her appeal on points of law should have been examined on its merits.
26.  With regard to the applicant’s complaint that her appeal on points of law was not admitted with a properly reasoned decision, the Government argued that the sufficiency of the reasoning should be assessed in the context of the nature and role of such a decision at the relevant stage of proceedings. The competence of the Senate in cassation proceedings was limited to ascertaining whether the substantial and procedural provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law had been applied (see paragraph 13 above). The Senate would examine only those appeals on points of law which cited violations of the Criminal Law or fundamental violations of the Criminal Procedure Law (see paragraph 15 above). A judge rapporteur assessed whether an appeal on points of law complied with the above provisions and adopted a decision by a written resolution. This procedure initially derived from the Senate’s jurisprudence, whereas from 1 July 2009 the procedure was codified in the Criminal Procedure Law (see paragraph 16 above).
27.  The Government argued that at this preliminary stage there was no objective need for more complex reasoning by the judge rapporteur, apart from a reference to the relevant provision of the Criminal Procedure Law. In support the Government relied of the cases of  Gorou v. Greece (no. 2)  ([GC], no. 12686/03, 20 March 2009), and  Bufferne v. France  ((dec.), no. 54367/00, ECHR 2002‑III (extracts)) in which the Court has not found such a practice incompatible with the requirement of sufficient reasoning under Article 6 of the Convention. Given that the applicant submitted her appeal on points of law in an attempt to achieve a re-examination of evidence already assessed by the appellate court, and that the appeal on points of law did not cite any violation susceptible to the institution of cassation proceedings, the Government contended that the impugned decision contained sufficient reasoning.
2.  The Court’s assessment
28.  According to the Court’s case-law, judgments of courts and tribunals should adequately state the reasons on which they are based. The extent to which this duty to give reasons applies may vary according to the nature of the decision and must be determined in the light of the circumstances of the case. Although Article 6 § 1 obliges courts to give reasons for their decisions, it cannot be understood as requiring a detailed answer to every argument (see  García Ruiz v. Spain  [GC], no. 30544/96, § 26, ECHR 1999‑I).
29.  The Court has held that courts of cassation comply with their obligation to provide sufficient reasoning when they base themselves on a specific legal provision, without further reasoning, in dismissing cassation appeals which do not have any prospects of success (see  Sale v. France , no. 39765/04, § 17, 21 March 2006, and  Burg and Others v. France  (dec.), no. 34763/02, ECHR 2003‑II; for the same approach with regard to constitutional court practice see  Wildgruber v. Germany , (dec.) no. 32817/02, 16 October 2006). In order to determine whether the requirements of fairness in Article 6 were met, the Court has considered matters such as the nature of the filtering procedure and its significance in the context of the proceedings as a whole, the scope of the powers of the court of appeal, and the manner in which the applicant’s interests were actually presented and protected before that court (see e.g.  Hansen v. Norway , no. 15319/09, § 73, 2 October 2014, with further references to  Ekbatani v. Sweden , 26 May 1988, § 27, Series A no. 134, and  Monnell and Morris v. the United Kingdom , 2 March 1987, § 56).
30.  The Court observes that in the applicant’s case the Senate, represented by a judge rapporteur, found that the requirements of section 573 of the Criminal Procedure Law had not been complied with (see paragraph 12 above). In accordance with section 573 of the Criminal Procedure Law, the Senate may refuse to admit an appeal on points of law, if such an appeal is not substantiated by fundamental violations of Criminal Procedure Law. Such “fundamental violations” are defined in section 575 of that law. The first and second paragraphs of that provision lay down specific violations, which are automatically presumed to be “fundamental”. By contrast, the third paragraph is open-ended – it refers to any violations of the Criminal Procedure Law which may be declared “fundamental” because they have “led to adoption of an unlawful judgment or decision”.
31.  It is true that a general reference to the specific legal provision included in the cassation court’s letter did not specify why, in view of the applicable provision, the complaints contained in the appeal on points of law was not considered by the Senate to be fundamental in character. The reasons adduced by the appellate courts are of importance for the Court satisfying itself that a national court did in fact address the essential issues which were submitted to its jurisdiction and, for example, did not merely endorse without further ado the findings reached by a lower court (see  Helle v. Finland , 19 December 1997, § 60,  Reports of Judgments and Decisions  1997‑VIII). Besides, the Court must ascertain that decisions of national courts are not flawed by arbitrariness or otherwise manifestly unreasonable, this being the limit of the Court’s competence in assessing whether domestic law has been correctly interpreted and applied (see, for example,  Marina v. Latvia , no. 46040/07, § 61, 26 October 2010).
32.  In the present case, given the nature of the applicant’s appeal on points of law, the Court considers it sufficiently proved that the Senate had ruled out the existence of circumstances warranting the initiation of cassation proceedings. In all her appeals the applicant raised several complaints concerning the procedure followed in establishing the evidence in her criminal case. These complaints were duly examined by two court instances with full jurisdiction, and in its judgments the lower courts provided proper reasoning. It was not for the Senate to re-examine the existing evidence or to obtain new evidence, as requested by the applicant. Furthermore, as showed by the documents submitted to the Court, the Senate had considered the applicant’s arguments, had given the reason for rejecting the complaint and had explained to the applicant its competence in relation to the re-examination of evidence (see paragraph 12 above). In these circumstances the Court is satisfied that the Senate has duly examined the grounds of the applicant’s appeal on points of law, and that the cassation court’s reasoning in this case has been sufficient.
33.  There has accordingly been no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
II.  OTHER ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE CONVENTION
34.  The applicant also raised a complaint under Article 6 § 2 of the Convention that the principle of the presumption of innocence in her criminal case had been violated. This complaint was not communicated to the Government.
35.  In the light of all the material in its possession, and in so far as the matter complained of is within its competence, the Court considers that the remaining complaint does not disclose any appearance of a violation of Article 6 § 2 of the Convention or any other provision of the Convention or its Protocols. It follows that it is inadmissible under Article 35 § 3 (a) and must be rejected pursuant to Article 35 § 4 of the Convention.
FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT, UNANIMOUSLY,
1.   Declares  the complaint concerning Article 6 § 1 admissible and the remainder of the application inadmissible;
2.   Holds  that there has been no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention;
Done in English, and notified in writing on 13 October 2016, pursuant to Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
Milan Blaško Angelika Nußberger Deputy Registrar President

